docs: temporal filters revision (#19985)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/transform-data/patterns/temporal-filters.md

    parent: 'sql-patterns'
---

A "temporal filter" is a `WHERE` or `HAVING` clause which uses the [`mz_now`](/sql/functions/now_and_mz_now) function.
This function returns Materialize's current virtual timestamp, which works to keep up with real time as data is processed.
Applying a temporal filter reduces the working dataset, saving memory resources and focusing results on the recent past.

Here is a typical temporal filter that considers records whose timestamps are within the last 5 minutes.

```sql
WHERE mz_now() <= event_ts + INTERVAL '5min'
```

Consider this diagram that shows a record `B` falling out of the result set as time moves forward:

![temporal filter diagram](/images/temporal-filter.svg)

{{< note >}}
It may feel more natural to write this filter as the equivalent `WHERE event_ts >= mz_now() - INTERVAL '5min'`.

> However, for reasons having to do with the internal implementation of `mz_now()`, there are currently no valid operators for the [`mz_timestamp` type](/sql/types/mz_timestamp) that would allow this.

Reviewer: either explain what those internal details are or drop. I think we drop for now

    parent: 'sql-patterns'
---

> A "temporal filter" is a `WHERE` or `HAVING` clause which uses the [`mz_now`](/sql/functions/now_and_mz_now) function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A _temporal filter_ is a `WHERE` or `HAVING` clause which uses the [`mz_now()`](/sql/functions/now_and_mz_now) function.
```

This function returns Materialize's current virtual timestamp, which works to keep up with real time as data is processed.
Applying a temporal filter reduces the working dataset, saving memory resources and focusing results on the recent past.

Here is a typical temporal filter that considers records whose timestamps are within the last 5 minutes.

```sql
WHERE mz_now() <= event_ts + INTERVAL '5min'
```

Consider this diagram that shows a record `B` falling out of the result set as time moves forward:

![temporal filter diagram](/images/temporal-filter.svg)

{{< note >}}
It may feel more natural to write this filter as the equivalent `WHERE event_ts >= mz_now() - INTERVAL '5min'`.
However, there are currently no valid operators for the [`mz_timestamp` type](/sql/types/mz_timestamp) that would allow this.
{{< /note >}}

## Requirements

You can only use `mz_now()` to establish a temporal filter under the following conditions:

> - `mz_now` appears in a `WHERE` or `HAVING` clause.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `mz_now()` appears in a `WHERE` or `HAVING` clause.
```

- The clause must compare `mz_now()` to a [`numeric`](/sql/types/numeric) or [`timestamp`](/sql/types/timestamp) expression not containing `mz_now()`
- The comparison must be one of `=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, or `>=`, or operators that desugar to them or a conjunction of them (for example, `BETWEEN...AND...`).
    At the moment, you can't use the `!=` operator with `mz_now()`.

## Examples

These examples create real objects.
After you have tried the examples, make sure to drop these objects and spin down any resources you may have created.

> ### Sliding Window

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Sliding window
```

    ```sql
    CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW tracking_tasks AS
    SELECT
      name,
      created_ts + ttl as expiration_time
    FROM tasks
    WHERE mz_now() < created_ts + ttl;
    ```
    The moment `mz_now()` crosses the expiration time of a record, that record is retracted (removed) from the result set.

You can now:

- Query the remaining time for a row:
  ```sql
    SELECT expiration_time - now() AS remaining_ttl
    FROM tracking_tasks
    WHERE name = 'time_to_eat';
  ```

- Check if a particular row is still available:
  ```sql
  SELECT true
  FROM tracking_tasks
  WHERE name = 'security_block';
  ```

- Trigger an external process when a row expires:
  ```sql
    INSERT INTO tasks VALUES ('send_email', now(), INTERVAL '5 seconds');
    COPY( SUBSCRIBE tracking_tasks WITH (SNAPSHOT = false) ) TO STDOUT;

  ```
  ```nofmt
  mz_timestamp | mz_diff | name       | expiration_time |
  -------------|---------|------------|-----------------|
  ...          | -1      | send_email | ...             | <-- Time to send the email!
  ```

> ### Periodically Emit Results

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Periodically emit results
```

1. Subscribe to the `output`.
    ```sql
    COPY (SUBSCRIBE (SELECT * FROM output)) TO STDOUT;
    ```
1. In a different session, insert some records.
    ```sql
    INSERT INTO input VALUES (1, now());
    -- wait a moment
    INSERT INTO input VALUES (1, now());
    -- wait a moment
    INSERT INTO input VALUES (1, now());
    -- wait a moment
    INSERT INTO input VALUES (2, now());
    ```
1. Back at the `SUBSCRIBE`, wait about a minute for your final aggregation result to show up the moment the 1 minute window ends.
    ```nofmt
     mz_timestamp | mz_diff |  id   | count |      window_end
    --------------|---------|-------|-------|----------------------
    1686889140000       1       1       3       2023-06-16 04:19:00
    1686889140000       1       2       1       2023-06-16 04:19:00
    ```
    If you are very patient, you will see these results retracted in 7 days.
    Press `Ctrl+C` to exit the `SUBSCRIBE` when you are finished playing.

From here, you could create a [Kafka sink](/sql/create-sink/) and use Kafka Connect to archive the historical results to a data warehouse (ignoring Kafka tombstone records that represent retracted results).

> ## "Late Arriving Events" and Grace Period

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Late arriving events
```

For various reasons, it's possible for records to arrive out of order.
For example, network connectivity issues may cause a mobile device to emit data with a timestamp from the relatively distant past.
How can you account for late arriving data in Materialize?

Consider the temporal filter for the most recent hour's worth of records.

```sql
WHERE mz_now() <= event_ts + INTERVAL '1hr'
```

Suppose a record with a timestamp `11:00:00` arrives "late" with a virtual timestamp of `11:59:59` and you query this collection at a virtual timestamp of `12:00:00`.
According to the temporal filter, the record is included for results as of virtual time `11:59:59` and retracted just after `12:00:00`.

Let's say another record comes in with a timestamp of `11:00:00`, but `mz_now()` has marched forward to `12:00:01`.
Unfortunately, this record does not pass the filter and is excluded from processing altogether.

> All this to say, if you want to account for late arriving data up to some given time duration, you must adjust your temporal filter to allow for such records to make an appearance in the result set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In conclusion: if you want to account for late arriving data up to some given time duration, you must adjust your temporal filter to allow for such records to make an appearance in the result set.
```

This is often referred to as a **grace period**.

## Temporal filter pushdown

{{< alpha />}}

All of the queries in the previous examples only return results based on recently-added events.
Materialize can "push down" filters that match this pattern all the way down to its storage layer, skipping over old data that’s not relevant to the query.
Here are the key benefits of this optimization:
- For ad-hoc `SELECT` queries, temporal filter pushdown can substantially improve query latency.

> - When a materialized view is created or its cluster restarts, temporal filter pushdown can substantially reduce the time it takes to start serving results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a materialized view is created or the cluster maintaining it restarts, temporal filter pushdown can substantially reduce the time it takes to start serving results.
```

The columns filtered should correlate with the insertion or update time of the row.
In the examples above, the `event_ts` value in each event correlates with the time the event was inserted, so filters that reference these columns should be pushed down to the storage layer.
However, the values in the `content` column are not correlated with insertion time in any way, so filters against `content` will probably not be pushed down to the storage layer.

Temporal filters that consist of arithmetic, date math, and comparisons are eligible for pushdown, including all the examples in this page.

> However, more complex filters might not be. You can check whether the filters in your query can be pushed down by using [the `filter_pushdown` option](/sql/explain/#output-modifiers) to `EXPLAIN`. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, more complex filters might not be. You can check whether the filters in your query can be pushed down by using [the `filter_pushdown` option](/sql/explain/#output-modifiers) in an `EXPLAIN` statement. For example:
```

```sql
EXPLAIN WITH(filter_pushdown)
SELECT count(*)
FROM events
WHERE mz_now() <= event_ts + INTERVAL '30s';
----
Explained Query:
[...]
Source materialize.public.events
  filter=((mz_now() <= timestamp_to_mz_timestamp((#1 + 00:00:30))))
  pushdown=((mz_now() <= timestamp_to_mz_timestamp((#1 + 00:00:30))))
```

> The filter in our query appears in the `pushdown=` list at the bottom of the output, so our filter pushdown optimization will be able to filter out irrelevant ranges of data in that source and make the overall query more efficient.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The filter in our query appears in the `pushdown=` list at the bottom of the output, so the filter pushdown optimization will be able to filter out irrelevant ranges of data in that source and make the overall query more efficient.
```
